..
 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported
 License.

 http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode

==========================================
Log Request ID Mappings
==========================================


https://blueprints.launchpad.net/nova/+spec/log-request-id-mappings

Tracking requests across multiple OpenStack services is difficult.


Problem description
===================

Each OpenStack service sends a request ID header with HTTP responses. This
value can be useful for tracking down problems in the logs. However, when
operations cross service boundaries, this tracking becomes difficult, as
services generate a new ID for each inbound request; a nova request ID cannot
help users find debug info for other services that were called by nova while
a request to nova was being fulfilled. This becomes especially problematic when
many requests are coming at once, especially at the gate, where tempest is now
running tests in parallel. Simply matching timestamps between service logs is
no longer a feasible solution. Therefore, another method of request tracing
is needed to aid debugging.


Proposed change
===============

A request ID is generated at the start of request processing. This is the ID
that a user will see when their request returns. Other OpenStack services
that nova calls out to (such as glance) will send responses with their request
ID as a header. By logging the mapping of the two request IDs (nova->glance), a
user will be  able to easily lookup the request ID returned by glance in the
n-api log. With the glance request ID in hand, a user can then check the glance
logs for debug info which corresponds to the request made to nova.

There are two request IDs required to form the log message: one generated by
nova, and one included in the response from another service. The request ID
generated by nova is in the context that is passed in to the python client
wrappers. The request ID of the other service does not yet reach nova's
client wrappers; this value being returned depends on some client blueprints
being implemented (see Dependencies). Once both request IDs are available, the
logging will be done using link_request_ids() from request_utils.

Alternatives
------------

This idea surfaced in previous cycles[1], with the proposed solution being a
unified request ID that would be passed between services. While work was
started on this, the approach was eventually deemed unsatisfactory, as it
would allow for meddling with the request ID value on the client side. A client
reusing the same request ID would eliminate the benefit of request tracing.
With a carefully chosen request ID, one user could even interfere with the
debugging effort of another user. So having the request ID be generated by the
server is essential.

Data model impact
-----------------

None.

REST API impact
---------------

None.

Security impact
---------------

None.

Notifications impact
--------------------

The request_utils module used will generate an INFO notification for each
request ID mapping that is logged.

Other end user impact
---------------------

The only places an end user will see this is in the nova logs or in the
generated notifications.

Performance Impact
------------------

None.

Other deployer impact
---------------------

In order for nova to log the request ID value of the other service, the python
client for that service needs to be passing back the request ID it gets from
the HTTP response from the service. New releases of python-glanceclient,
python-cinderclient, etc. will be necessary for this to occur. As such,
deployers will need to be running newer versions of the client in order for
the request ID mappings to be logged. If the client is not returning the
request ID, no logging will occur.

Developer impact
----------------

None.

Implementation
==============

Assignee(s)
-----------

Primary assignee:
  chris-buccella

Work Items
----------

1. Sync request_utils module from oslo
2. As various service's python clients are updated to return the request ID,
   log the request ID mapping using request_utils.link_request_ids():
   1. python-glanceclient
   2. python-cinderclient
   3. python-neutronclient
3. Update requirements.txt with the new required versions of the clients

Dependencies
============

* New versions of some python clients. The following blueprints need to be
  completed first:

  * https://blueprints.launchpad.net/python-glanceclient/+spec/return-req-id
  * https://blueprints.launchpad.net/python-cinderclient/+spec/return-req-id
  * https://blueprints.launchpad.net/python-neutronclient/+spec/return-req-id

Testing
=======

A tempest test could be added to ensure that notifications are being generated
in the correct format.


Documentation Impact
====================

The Operations Guide should be updated particularly:

* Chapter 11, under "Determining Which Component Is Broken"
* Chapter 13, under "Tracing Instance Requests"


References
==========

[0] Proposed change for nova<->glance logging from Icehouse cycle:
https://review.openstack.org/#/c/68518

[1] Discussion from the HK Summit:
https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/icehouse-summit-nova-cross-project-request-ids

[2] Refinements from the ML:
http://lists.openstack.org/pipermail/openstack-dev/2013-December/020774.html
